On Evidence
These are notes on evidence gathered from multiple different sources such as logic and legal case law sources. These notes provide useful clues about how to philosophically describe how evidence works.

Relevance
Prima Facie - Admissibility

Any item of evidence that has a tendency to increase or diminish the probability of the existence of fact in issue. (R V ARP 1998 S.C.C.)

Good evidence - logically connected 
Irrelevant evidence is distracting; a waste of time and money
Measurable tendency
Relates to the assertion

Materiality
Primary facts  proven

In law: intentionally low threshold of evidence. Marginally useful.

Primary Materiality
Defined by the assertion; matter of dispute
What issue is disagreed on, what is the dispute

Secondary Materiality
Facts about people relating evidence
Of consequence: Bias, racism, methodology, credibility

Probativeness
Accessing the tendency to prove or disprove

The sum of the probability of all evidence known is the probability of the fact.
Burden of proof.

Probative Value
Linking
Strength of proving the issue
How important is it to the issue of the case
Strength of connection
How strongly does it make the case

Admissibility and Weight


Prediduce
Prejudicial Effect

Evidence that will lead people to an improper conclusion
Measure of risk towards misleading people
Opposite of reality or truthful claim of reality

It is said to be Prejudicial if:

Emotional Argument - Creates contempt or sympathy
Causes Misdirection - Has value, but is distracting from the material fact
Encourages Guessing - Causes people to make hunch decisions ie. is too time consuming
Impractical - Overly expensive given the value and level of importance it provides.

When the prejudicial effect is greater than the probative value then the evidence is usually excluded.

Chains of Evidence and Reasoning

Chain of Evidence
Can tell that the evidence is not relative since the evidence presented is equally likely to make it more and less likely to have happened, it is irrelevant.

Chain of Reasoning
Does not need to prove absolutely
Must be relative (probative and material)

Given
A: Assertion
B: Inferred Fact

Then
A → Probative → B

How does A show B?
Relanvence
B must be a material fact
A must have a tendency to show B
Logically Sound
Internally consistent

Irrelevance: When evidence is equally likely to prove and disprove the material fact.

Forensics 

Physical vs. Non-physical
Physical 
Tangible item from event or experiment
Non-Physical
Eyewitness testimony or expert opinion
Real vs. Demonstrative
Real 
Any Evidence created by a causal chain of events in question
Demonstrative
Symbolic representation of an object designed to present evidence such as a photo or diagram. 
Known vs. Unknown
Known
Evidence in which the source can be determined with certainty at the scene of the crime without later laboratory testing. Ie its chain of custody is known and sampling is proven.
Unknown
Evidence source linked by examination at a later date from testing such as whose blood was found at the scene of a crime as determined by a lab.
Class vs. Individual
Class
Evidence that is linked to a class of items but not to a specific source or person.
Individual
Linked with only one source such as a person or object.

Validity of Evidence

Conformity with other measurements
Bias towards the subject or a matter of fact.

Circumstantial evidence requires that a chain of evidence has conclusively been linked prior to the new set of evidence. Ie. rainfall conforms to a known pattern of weather and therefore having only certain pieces of evidence with caps can lead to a reasonable conclusion as opposed to a chain of events that has not been established before.

Contravists actions or knowledge with respect to the context



Aspects of Evidence

Sense: Direct or Indirect

Derived vs. not

Direct Measure vs. not

Aided by tool vs. not

Temporal event vs. Reproducible Theory

Truth tables
Direct sense, direct measurement (tool measurement, testimony)
Derived direct sense (logic, math)
Direct sense, indirect measurement ( direct sense on tools there a direct observation is not possible.)
Indirect sense, direct measure
Indirect sense, indirect measure
Derived direct sense, indirect measure
Derived indirect sense direct measure
Directed indirect sense indirect measure.

Types of measurement
Aided with tool vs. un-aided
Accuracy of tool
Consistency - Difficulty using the tool


Direct Evidence

Use of system (math logic, guessing)
Accuracy of mapping variables to reality
Completeness of mapping to reality (deltas & gappiness)

